> Without the triumph of formalism, string theory, inflation etc. would be inconceivable.

> It’s amusing coming across some old K-6 math textbooks from the 1960’s which covered the “New Math” program of that era. “New Math” attempted to cover things like modular arithmetic (ie. clock math), set theory, groups, relations + functions, limits, base-n arithmetic (where n is a base other than 10), etc … to kids from kindergarten to grade 6 or 7. (Nowhere was there anything like multiplication times tables). The guys who came up with “New Math” must have caught the Bourbaki “virus”.

> They definitely did very much influence the “New Math” and you certainly can blame them for inflicting things like Venn diagrams and injective mappings on grade-school kids. But the problems with string theory are not at all their fault, or in general, not the fault of mathematicians at all. Just take a look at the great majority of string theory papers these days. Many of them don’t involve mathematics more sophisticated than what we teach our first and second year undergrads, and the calculations are often very informal, based on very unclear definitions, the complete antithesis of the Bourbaki philosophy, much more like what Bourbaki was reacting against.
>
> It’s also not true at all that the works of Bourbaki are now thought highly of among research mathematicians. Their heyday was in the fifties and sixties; by the late seventies and eighties, this kind of formalism was not so popular. My impression is that now most mathematicians don’t ever look at most of the Bourbaki volumes except every so often as a reference for some specific definition or result, and no one thinks they’re a good place to try and learn something from. The volumes on Lie algebras and groups, which were mostly written by Borel, are probably the ones that people think most highly of and still use. Even the people most interested in formalism are not interested in Bourbaki, instead they care about Grothendieck’s work and use categories, a point of view that Bourbaki never adopted (and this is one reason that the Bourbaki project ground to a halt).

> Bourbaki accomplished a lot of what it initially set out to do during the 30s, which was to provide the details of a logically rigorous framework for certain kinds of mathematics that people were working on. They did this for analysis and algebra, but not for geometry (they couldn’t even agree on exactly how to define a manifold, from what I remember). The problem is that mathematics evolves, and as it does, ideas about what’s the right foundational material change. Grothendieck’s new ideas about the foundations of algebraic geometry changed the way mathematicians look at the subject, and made some of Bourbaki not wrong, just incomplete and less interesting. I suspect a project like Bourbaki needs to be reinvented and redone from the ground up every few generations.

> Peter – what I know of Bourbaki comes from a mathematician friend who was forced to endure it at Columbia and MIT. He had a satori about it and completely retaught himself math from a non-formalist point of view, so he had both an insider’s and an outsider’s perspective. I myself could never tolerate excessive formalism so it never entered my consciousness directly. His awakening moment came when he realized that after proving some complex existence theorems for PDEs in his thesis, he discovered in his new career as an applied mathematician that he couldn’t easily do a simple surface integral. This fact struck me like a thunderbolt. Excessive formalism had led to a situation where a brilliant person could not tackle a simple problem. I do see parallels with this and the rise of unreasonable physics ideas. There is some input that must come from the intuition about what makes physical sense. This intuition can’t be taught, and without it, what is one going to say? The answer is to hide behind formalist axiomatizing – the string hypothesis is really a formalist conception that is not stimulated by physical necessity or experimental evidence. The postmodernist will say – it doesn’t matter what you say, only the social context in which it is said. This is very much at the bottom of what Smolin describes when he talks about the milieu of string theorists.

https://quantnet.com/threads/terry-tao-the-greatest-mathematician-in-the-world.21191/page-2

> "so you look back at your books, at first the sight of topics such as measure theory and group theory excite you - you have found structure again"
>
> Never liked group theory and measure because of lack of applications.
>
> //
>
> What is a *group*? Algebraists teach that this is supposedly a set with two operations that satisfy a load of easily-forgettable axioms. This definition provokes a natural protest: why would any sensible person need such pairs of operations? "Oh, curse this maths" - concludes the student (who, possibly, becomes the Minister for Science in the future).
>
> We get a totally different situation if we start off not with the group but with the concept of a transformation (a one-to-one mapping of a set onto itself) as it was historically. A collection of transformations of a set is called a group if along with any two transformations it contains the result of their consecutive application and an inverse transformation along with every transformation.
> This is all the definition there is. The so-called "axioms" are in fact just (obvious) *properties* of groups of transformations. What axiomatisators call "abstract groups" are just groups of transformations of various sets considered up to isomorphisms (which are one-to-one mappings preserving the operations). As Cayley proved, there are no "more abstract" groups in the world. **So why do the algebraists keep on tormenting students with the abstract definition?**
> By the way, in the 1960s I taught group theory to Moscow *schoolchildren*. Avoiding all the axiomatics and staying as close as possible to physics, in half a year I got to the Abel theorem on the unsolvability of a general equation of degree five in radicals (having on the way taught the pupils complex numbers, Riemann surfaces, fundamental groups and monodromy groups of algebraic functions). This course was later published by one of the audience, V. Alekseev, as the book *The Abel theorem in problems*.
> What is a *smooth manifold*? In a recent American book I read that Poincaré was not acquainted with this (introduced by himself) notion and that the "modern" definition was only given by Veblen in the late 1920s: a manifold is a topological space which satisfies a long series of axioms.
> For what sins must students try and find their way through all these twists and turns? Actually, in Poincaré's *Analysis Situs* there is an absolutely clear definition of a smooth manifold which is much more useful than the "abstract" one.